# Glase is a package to support a ComMarker Omni 1 5W UV laser

There is no official support for Linux for this laser, so I've
developed this package and cli tool to bridge that gap in a way that
meets my needs.

## How to use

Build and kick the tires (no laser activity from this first example):

```
$ git clone https://github.com/tinkerator/glase.git
$ cd glase
$ go build examples/glase.go
$ ./glase --info
```

- My device is `mfg="BJJCZ" product="USBLMCV4" ...`, so I won't be
  surprised if a different device misbehaves.
- If you are fortunate enough to have more than one of these devices,
  you can specify `--serial=<xxx>` on the command line to operate on a
  specific one.

### First time gotchas

- If this fails with an error about `libusb-1.0` not being found, try
  one of the following and then the `go build examples/glase.go`
  command again:
  - Debian: `sudo apt install libusb-1.0-0-dev pkg-config`
  - Fedora: `sudo dnf install libusb1-devel pkgconfig-pkg-config`
- The first time you run this, you will likely get a `bad access [code -3]` error.
  - To resolve that, create the following file with `sudo nano
/etc/udev/rules.d/99-omni1.rules`, with this content:

```
# This rule was added for the ComMarker Omni 1 5W UV Laser device.
SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ENV{DEVTYPE}=="usb_device", ATTRS{idVendor}=="9588", ATTRS{idProduct}=="9899", MODE="0666"
```
  - Then, to refresh the rules, run `sudo udevadm control --reload-rules` and also `sudo udevadm trigger`.

## Recalibrating

The laser is shipped with a copy of EZCad2 Windows software on a USB
stick. My laser arrived with the 150mm lens mounted on the laser. The
USB stick had a file `jcz150.cor` on it that was the distortion
correction file for my laser. It seemed to mostly work fine (`--cor
jcz150.cor`). But I found it generated a non-square coordinate pattern
off to the left edge of its 15cm range. After teaching the `glase`
package to consume this file format and upload it to the laser, I
followed the following strategy to generate a new `local.fixup.cor`
file for my specific laser.

This is the procedure I followed:

I placed a transparency sheet flat on the work surface of the machine.

I burned a *barrel distorted* calibration grid with default parameters
over this sheet (without any correction data applied):

```
$ ./glase --cor "" --burn --calibrate
```

I examined the grid with a mm marked ruler.  The grid spacing
generated by the `--calibrate` flag is 1000 galvo units of distance
(with 64 squares, this is a total galvo unit range of 65000). For the
official height of focus of my laser, this 1000 unit distance, burned
marks on the transparency sheet close to 1/10th of an inch. So, I
derived a correction file that forces exactly this normalization. That
is, 1000 galvo units is, by definition, 2.5mm (about 1/10th inch).

I started by examining the outer 4 corners of the grid, its center
point and the central point of each of the 4 sides. That is 9 points
in total of the grid. I then created a `local.fixup` file with
information about how much each of these 9 points deviated from its
ideal point. I took the center point (0,0) in galvo units to be the
true mm center of the laser's range. Further, the outer edge centers
appeared to be aligned well with this center point to generate a
convenient perpendicular cross - they just weren't exactly 8cm in
length. Finally, I looked at how the outer 4 corners of the grid
deviated from the (+/-8cm,+/-8cm) positions I wanted. I corrected for
all this with these 9 lines (if you repeat this with your laser, you
may get different numbers):

```
0 0 0 0
-32 0 -2 0
32 0 2.5 0
0 -32 0 -2.5
0 32 0 3.5
-32 -32 2 -4
-32 32 1.5 5
32 32 0 5.5
32 -32 -2 -4
```

Each line of this file is of the following form: `xGrid/1000`,
`yGrid/1000`, `mmXWrong`, `mmYWrong`. That is the `mm*Wrong` values
capture *how wrong* the rendered crossing point is in mm. So, if a
rendered point is a little to the right, its `mmXWrong` value is
positive by that many millimeters. To be very clear about orientation,
the smallest (most negative) Y values are closest to the *front* of
the machine - the edge that features the red emergency stop
button. Left (negative X) and right (positive X) are as viewed from
this *front* of the machine.

The first line of this file says no correction is needed for the
origin point (0mm,0mm). The next two lines say no Y correction is
needed, but the rendered (-8cm,8cm) X-axis line, without correction,
is observed to be 4.5mm (or 2.5-(-2) mm) too long. Similarly, the
rendered (-8cm,8cm) Y axis line is 6mm too long. It took a few
attempts to get the remaining 4 point corrections to generate a
correct 2.5mm grid. Indeed, for my laser, the bottom corner points
seemed to resist rendering as (+/-8cm,-8cm) points. This is, I
presume, the reason the ComMarker writeup asserts the laser only has a
15cm range.

To create a custom `local.fixup.cor` file from this data, do this:

```
$ ./glase --cor local.fixup --sim
```

The meat of the generated `local.fixup.cor` file's content starts at
byte offset 36. The bytes before that are not important to the `glase`
package, and other than the `JCZ_COR_2_1` magic, are mostly filled
with nonsense bytes. I have no idea if the generated file will work
with the EZCad2 software. I don't intend to bother trying that.

The `./glase` tool defaults to looking for a `local.fixup.cor` file in
the working directory, so if you want to use the `jcz150.cor` file you
received with your machine, make a local copy of that file with the
`local.fixup.cor` name.

## References

- The development of this code was inspired by [this
  post](https://hackaday.com/tag/balor/) and benefited greatly from
  that pioneering work, [Balor](https://www.bryce.pw/engraver.html).
- The excellent [meerk40t](https://github.com/meerk40t/meerk40t)
  successor to Balor.
- Also [galvoplotter](https://github.com/meerk40t/galvoplotter).

## License info

The `glase` package is distributed with the same BSD 3-clause
[license](LICENSE) as that used by
[golang](https://golang.org/LICENSE) itself.

## Reporting bugs

This is a hobby project, so I can't guarantee a fix, but do use the
[github `glase` bug
tracker](https://github.com/tinkerator/glase/issues).
